---
title: 'A complete Beginner’s guide — Web 3.0'
date: 2020-07-05
hidden: false
---

In this article, you will learn about web 3.0, its previous version, and many more.

> ❝On the web we all become small-town visitors lost in the big city.❞- Alison Gopnik

You have all heard about Web 3.0 & you all are curious to know about it. You all might have lots of questions & curious to know about Web3.0. So, be patient and read the complete article. I hope all your doubts will be cleared.

Before getting into Web 3.0 we will take a look at the pervious version of the web and what are there features. So, we have a better command and understanding about Web 3.0.

## Web 1.0:-

Web 1.0 is the first stage/phase of the World Wide Web evolution. The web, also known as the World Wide Web, is the foundational layer for how the internet is used, providing website and application services.

It was created as a hyperlinked information system. It had a huge library of data sourced on a screen from computer systems in the network for users to browse.

This phase was dominated by static websites, which were used to display some information & they have little interaction capabilities.

At this stage, there were only a few content creators & the majority of users were content consumers. An example of a web 1.0 website is CNN.

`Some Features of Web 1.0: —`
- Read-only web.
- Static web pages.
- One-way publishing medium.
- Page hyperlinking and bookmarking.
- Content served from the server’s file system.
- Only text mails could be written and sent — no option to attach images.
- Use of frames and tables place and align the elements on a webpage.

> ❝The Web makes people hypocritical, it encourage to take pseudonyms.❞

## Web 2.0: —

Web 2.0 is the first stage/phase of the World Wide Web evolution or participative Social Web. It started coming in the late 1990s. It is an enhanced version of Web 1.0.

It does not refer to a modification to any technical specification but to how web pages are designed and used.

The factor differentiating Web 2.0 & Web 1.0 is that Web 2.0 allows users to interact and collaborate. It contains several online tools and platforms where people share their perspectives, opinions, thoughts, and experiences.

Web 2.0 applications tend to interact much more with the end-user. As such, the end-user is not only a user of the application but also a participant with these 8 tools mentioned below:

- podcasting
- Blogging
- Tagging
- Curating with RSS
- Social bookmarking
- Social networking
- Social media
- Web content voting

> ❝The Domain Name Server (DNS) is the Achilles heel of the Web. The important thing is that it’s managed responsibly.❞- Tim Berners-Lee

`Some features of Web 2.0: —`
- Read-write web.
- Also known as participative web and social web.
- Dynamic content with high responsiveness to user inputs.
- User-generated content.
- Interoperability for end-users.
- User-friendly.

Know you have the basic knowledge about Web 1.0 & WEB 2.0. However, for better understanding, let’s see the difference between Web 1.0 & Web 2.0.

Now you all have a good understanding of the evolution of the old version of the Web. Now let’s understand what the hell is Web 3.0.

## Web 3. 0: —

It is the third stage of the world wide web, also referred to as the read-write-execute, which also refers to the future of the web. In this era of the web Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML) helps to understand the data the same way people do.

The Web 3.0 applications are decentralized peer-to-peer networks like Ethereum and IPFS. These networks are developed, operated, and maintained by their users rather than by a business. As a result, they self-organize and don’t have a single point of failure.

You’ll notice that cryptocurrencies are frequently mentioned when you hear about Web3. This is because many of these protocols include cryptocurrencies. Anyone who wishes to help create, control, or improve one of the projects is given a cash incentive (tokens).

These protocols frequently provide a wide range of services, including computation, storage, bandwidth, identification, hosting, and other online services previously supplied by cloud providers.

### What makes Web 3.0 so unique?

Web 3.0 is unique because it solves the serious issues that arise in Web 2.0, like gathering personal data by private networks, which are sold to marketers or stolen by hackers.

It is more focused on using technologies like machine learning and AI to provide relevant content for each user instead of just the content other end users have provided.

Web 3.0 is decentralized, which means a single organization does not control it, and the decentralized applications (apps) created on top of it are open.

### Properties of Web 3.0

Many properties define it. I’ll only be mentioning three key characteristics that can help us determine Web 3.0:-

`1. Semantic Web`

One of the key elements of Web 3.0 is the Semantic Web. It enhances online technologies by allowing users to create, share, and connect content via search and analysis based on the ability to understand the meaning of words rather than keywords or numbers.

`2. 3D Graphics`

3D Graphics is being used widely in websites and services in Web 3.0, such as online games, e-commerce, and portfolio website.

`3. Artificial Intelligence`

Semantic Web and Artificial Intelligence are the two cornerstones of web 3.0. By combining this capacity with natural language processing, computers can understand information on a human-like level to provide faster and more relevant results. In doing so, they become more intelligent and better satisfy users' needs.

`There are many more properties other than those are: -`
- Connectivity
- Ubiquity
- Blockchain
- Decentralized
- Edge Computing

`How Web 3.0 Can Change Our Lives`

Web 3.0 can change lives by adding semantics and machine learning, which is an evolution in which computers can understand the meaning of information behind it. As a result, they can learn what you are interested in, help you find what you want faster, and understand the relationship between things.

Web 3.0 is no longer a dream but a reality (at least in many cases). In fact, it is cognitive technology like that of experts. An AI that makes this all possible. Understanding language is integral to so many facets of the Web. By making semantics and natural language processing central components to it, the possibilities are endless.

There are plenty of resources available to help you get started and learn more about this exciting new world. So go forth and explore, and join our community which aims to bridging the gap between beginner’s and professionals.